Write your biography here. Tell the world about yourself. Link to your favorite [subreddit](http://reddit.com). You can put a picture in, too. The code is already in, just name your picture `prof_pic.jpg` and put it in the `img/` folder.

Put your address / P.O. box / other info right below your picture. You can also disable any these elements by editing `profile` property of the YAML header of your `_pages/about.md`. Edit `_bibliography/papers.bib` and Jekyll will render your [publications page](/al-folio/publications/) automatically.

Link to your social media connections, too. This theme is set up to use [Font Awesome icons](https://fontawesome.com/) and [Academicons](https://jpswalsh.github.io/academicons/), like the ones below. Add your Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Google Scholar, or just disable all of them.

Since the summer of my freshman year of high school, I've self taught myself the fundamentals of development and programming. I am passionate about creating with code and bringing ideas to life with software. Not only am I passionate about teaching myself, but I love to teach others how to leverage software for good. I teach as a coding instructor, tutor, and lead my high school's computer science club. Ironically, what really got me interested in software was hardware. In the spring of 2020, I built my own computer. Through this process, I learned a lot about how computers work, and consequently, how software interacts with the computer. I am familiar with programming languages and technologies such as Python, Java, and JavaScript.